FIP-0118: editorial cleanup and missing sections (#1271)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-0118.md

    block-reward issuance, f02 reads its own state, pays the winning
    miner and each Orchestrator wallet its portion, and burns the
    remainder.

2.  **Stream Weights Actor (SWA): the split AMONG streams.** It
    registers or removes streams and sets each stream's *Weight record*.
    Each stream's designated writer sets the wallets and shares within
    that stream. f02 itself enforces the hard guardrails (Σ_i w_i = 1,
    caps on the number of streams and recipients, and an activation
    timelock).

3.  **Service Rewards Actor (SRA): the split AMONG orchestrators.** It
    computes the Orchestrator *Shares* s_i and holds the registry (which
    client payers, scoped by operator, are attributed to which
    Orchestrator). Each quarter it computes the Orchestrator shares from
    verifiable volume and writes the wallet-to-share map into f02; it
    never receives or holds value.

#### 2.2 Quarterly cycle

Quarters are consecutive EPOCHS_PER_QUARTER-epoch windows counted from
the activation epoch.

![Timeline of one quarter: posting period, verification window, values bind, conversion, gate check, shares update, timelock](../resources/fip-0118/quarter-timeline.png)

> *Figure 2: one quarter, end to end. Quarter Q ends at epoch E(Q) = activation_epoch + Q x EPOCHS_PER_QUARTER; steps 1 to 7 all run after E. Durations shown (3-day posting, 7-day verification) are the proposed values maintained in the governance repository; SWA_TIMELOCK is 7 days (Section 2.4). QuarterlyGateCheck (5) and SubmitShares (6) are independent and can run in either order.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Figure 2: one quarter, end to end. Quarter Q ends at epoch E(Q) = activation_epoch + Q x EPOCHS_PER_QUARTER; steps 1 to 4 all run after E. Durations shown (3-day posting, 7-day verification) are the proposed values maintained in the governance repository; SWA_TIMELOCK is 7 days (Section 2.4). QuarterlyGateCheck (5) and SubmitShares (6) are independent and can run in either order.*
```

Author: I didn't adopt this, because the steps 1 to 7 are in the figure and they are all after E. I've made it more clear by "the figure's numbered steps 1 to 7"

        recipient being the block winner chosen by leader election
        each epoch. Or EXPLICIT (a stored wallet-to-share map, updated
        only by the stream's designated **writer** via SetShares; for
        example, for the service stream, writer = SRA). A future stream
        paying one fixed wallet needs no separate form: it is the
        one-entry EXPLICIT case.

Weight and Distribution are orthogonal: a stream picks each
independently, so registering a new stream means giving it a Weight and
a Distribution and, when EXPLICIT, naming its single writer. f02 is not
involved in calculating the stream's share distribution. The writer
contract computes the shares off the per-epoch path and pushes the map
through SetShares; f02 applies that map when dividing the stream. f02
stores only the writer's address and the current map, never the rules.
For the service stream, SplitRule over FPV volumes lives inside the SRA
contract and governance process, leaving f02 agnostic.

2)  **Share**: one entry in an EXPLICIT stream's wallet-to-share map;
    for the service stream, the SRA writes the Orchestrator share map.

>     1.  **Stream list**: the ordered list of Stream records f02 holds

Reviewer: Should "Stream List" and "Weight Record" be sub-items of "Share" like this?

Author: nope, they should be top-level; I did fix this in #1272 already but that doesn't help get this landed!

    and implementability.

#### Question 2: Should the split apply to all sectors or only new ones?

  - **New sectors only:** given the low onboarding rate, this requires
    differentiating sectors at minting time, adds complexity, and
    produces a very slow ramp-up, deemed insufficient given the need
    for visible directional change quickly.

  - **All sectors (chosen):** faster to take effect, simpler to
    implement, and produces an immediate, predictable subsidy inflow.
    The fairness concern for existing CC sectors is limited, CC
    sectors are <15% of the network, and SnapDeals remains a
    transition path.

#### Question 3: Why not the f090 mining reserve?

f090 is intended for “growth of the Filecoin economy” and is technically
available, but it is finite and non-renewable; once depleted, the
service economy would need another source anyway. A block-reward split
is sustainable and tied directly to issuance: as long as the network
mints, services are funded. It also avoids the governance overhead of
unlocking reserve draws and does not expand total issuance. The split
addresses the incentive problem at the existing issuance layer, the

> mining SWA was always implicitly meant to fund both consensus security

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mining allocation was always implicitly meant to fund both consensus security
```

Is "mining SWA" correct here?

Author: no .. no it's not, thanks!

        holds and regulates the registry of Service Orchestrators.

      - **Consensus stream** pays the winning miner
        in the leader election mechanism, as today.
        
      - **Burn stream** pays to the burn actor.

The division among the streams happens according to **weights**: w0 for
the burn stream, w1 for the consensus stream, and w2 for the service
stream. These weights are set through another new governed contract,
the *Stream Weights Actor* (SWA), which at the time this FIP is accepted
and shipped has the following definition for the existing weights:

  - **w2** follows a volume-gated step-up: it starts at 5% and (after a
    bootstrap quarter) programmatically rises 5 percentage points per
    quarter, but only if the quarterly aggregated Filecoin Pay Volume
    (AggregatedFPV(Q), i.e., the sum of deal payments settled through
    Filecoin Pay over each registered Orchestrator's (payer, operator)
    pairs during quarter Q; see Section 2) is greater than or equal to
    a predefined USD-denominated target (Section 3.1.1). If this
    condition fails, w2 stays constant.
    
  - **w1** follows a published linear ramp down from 95% to 50% over ~9

>     quarters;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    quarters.
```

registry to the (payer, operator) pairs in Filecoin Pay whose settled
volume counts toward it; bindings are unique (a pair belongs to at most
one Orchestrator), declared by the Orchestrator, and verified by the SRA
Governance. Incentive alignment comes from the system-level volume gate:
the service weight w2 rises only when on-chain volume settled through
Filecoin Pay clears the target. Accountability is layered on top: posted
volume is recomputable by anyone from public settlement events, so a
misreported figure is detectable and correctable, while distinguishing
genuine demand from self-dealing is an off-chain judgment assigned to
SRA Governance, which can freeze or remove an Orchestrator (Section
4.2). **Phase 2** (future) opens registration permissionlessly, enabled
by standardized on-chain attribution: service contracts expose the
Orchestrator binding through a standard metadata interface, to be
specified in a future FRC (see Sections 3.2 and 4.2).

## Change Motivation

Filecoin Plus was designed to direct a fraction of block rewards toward
storage service, and in particular toward storage in PoRep sectors of

> genuinely useful data. At the high level, Fil+ and datacap are a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
genuinely useful data. At a high level, Fil+ and datacap are a
```

process for new clients, increases governance overhead, and makes the
system vulnerable to gaming, where high Fil+ activity does not correlate
with a high volume of legitimate data in deals (i.e., fake client demand).
See Discussion
[#1176](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/1176).
Therefore, today the implicit block reward split via datacap causes
substantial network resources to be spent on sectors delivering limited
ongoing client value.

This proposal resolves that tension by **shifting the signal** from
upfront data and demand classification to service delivery demonstrated
through on-chain payments. Rather than trying to predict which
data/service is 'real' or 'valuable', the Service Rewards Actor monitors
total payment volume (as a proxy for value created by the network) and
allocates a fraction of block rewards to the Service Orchestrator wallet
addresses. Any gap is burned. Over time the proportion of block reward
allocated to the Service Orchestrator will grow, but only as the network
clears defined levels of economic activity demonstrating growth in
demand.

This initiative also represents a significant opportunity to **simplify

> the L1** protocol: the new system will be a simpler and more predictable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the L1** protocol: the new system will result in a simpler, more predictable
```

L1 and tokenomics. By decoupling consensus and service economics, we get
a system where PoRep can exist for consensus security and services can
use whatever proving system the market demands rather than requiring
PoRep as the only pathway to block reward-linked service provision.

#### Could we just remove Fil+ and let the market work?

Removing Fil+ would support more onboarding and allow the block reward

> to function as an indirect subsidy for service provision (e.g., a SP can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to function as an indirect subsidy for service provision (e.g., an SP can
```

genuine paying clients negate the need for this support, the reality is
that current *client payments are often too small compared to the cost
gap of storing real data* versus engaging in pure mining activities.
Without an incentive explicitly dedicated to service, SPs would
naturally prioritize pure consensus mining without providing
value-creating services. Therefore, reserving a portion of the block
reward for services is not merely an economic lever; it is a way to
define the **network's identity**. Filecoin's fundamental mission is to
be a storage service network, differentiating it from a generic network
that simply uses storage. Achieving this mission will ultimately benefit
all participants.

The replacement mechanism designed here (i.e., a single issuance
divided by governed weights into competing destinations), with some
weights adjusted by a measured signal, *is strongly inspired by
the subnet model pioneered by Bittensor and similar subnet-based
incentive networks* (e.g. BitRobot), where a fixed emission is split
across subnets by governed weights and redistributed according to a
measured contribution. We acknowledge that conceptual inspiration

> directly. As in those systems, the weights are not static: they can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
explicitly. As in those systems, the weights are not static: they can
```

    `AggregatedFPV(Q)` (Section 3.2).

#### 2.3 FPV definitions

  - **Per-Orchestrator Filecoin Pay Volume (quarterly):** `FPV_i(Q)` is
    the volume settled on Filecoin Pay rails whose (payer, operator)
    pair is in Orchestrator i’s registered set. The atom is the rail,
    and each rail carries exactly one (payer, operator) pair. In other
    words:

      - **`FPV_i(Q)`** = gross value settled over Filecoin Pay rails in
        quarter Q, scoped to the Orchestrator’s registered (payer,
        operator) pairs:

          - `Σ total_settled_amount` over `RailSettled` events, **plus**

          - `Σ (net_payee_amount + operator_commission + network_fee)`
            over one-time-payment events (gross
            **reconstructed**, since the one-time-payment table stores
            no gross field), within Q's block window.

          - "In quarter Q" is asset-dependent: a stablecoin
            settlement belongs to Q when its settlement epoch falls
            in Q; a FIL settlement belongs to Q when its pricing
            print clears in Q (the FIL pricing rule below), which is
            always at or after the settlement epoch.

>           - Attribution is keyed on the (payer, operator) pair,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          - Attribution is keyed on the (payer, operator) pair;
```

            operator) are excluded by the contract (see Section 3.2).
            Indeed, the SRA enforces that each (payer, operator) pair
            is bound to at most one Orchestrator, so a registration
            that duplicates an existing binding reverts. Verification
            that a declared payer genuinely belongs to an Orchestrator
            is offchain dispute-driven: declarations are accepted by
            default; because duplicate bindings revert, a false claim
            surfaces exactly when the legitimate Orchestrator attempts
            to register the same pair, and SRA Governance resolves the
            contested binding, requesting evidence of the client
            relationship up to a signed client attestation.
            Anti-self-dealing checks on the self-declared lists remain
            an SRA Governance audit duty (Section 4.2).

  - **One total by construction.** The per-Orchestrator value
    `FPV_i(Q)` is the atom. The aggregated value is defined as their
    sum, `AggregatedFPV(Q) = Σ_i FPV_i(Q)`. The SWA’s gate reads
    exactly this sum and never independently re-measures global

>     on-chain volume, so the aggregated used by the gate and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    on-chain volume, so the aggregated value used by the gate and the
```

>     aggregated computed by the SRA are the same object and cannot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    aggregated value computed by the SRA are the same object and cannot
```

        example, for the service stream, writer = SRA). A future stream
        paying one fixed wallet needs no separate form: it is the
        one-entry `EXPLICIT` case.

Weight and Distribution are orthogonal: a stream picks each
independently, so registering a new stream means giving it a Weight and
a Distribution and, when `EXPLICIT`, naming its single writer. f02 is not
involved in calculating the stream's share distribution. The writer
contract computes the shares off the per-epoch path and pushes the map
through `SetShares`; f02 applies that map when dividing the stream. f02
stores only the writer's address and the current map, never the rules.
For the service stream, `SplitRule` over FPV volumes lives inside the SRA
contract and governance process, leaving f02 agnostic.

2)  **Share**: one entry in an `EXPLICIT` stream's wallet-to-share map;
    for the service stream, the SRA writes the Orchestrator share map.

3)  **Stream list**: the ordered list of Stream records f02 holds in
    state. Modified only by the SWA via `RegisterStream` / `RemoveStream`
    (see later). *Implemented as* an external list
    (`pub stream_registry: Cid` - since the f02 state churns and a

>     registry list is going to change infrequently so more than a few

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    registry list will change infrequently, we store it externally to save storage).
```

>     entries will make it storage-wasteful).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    
```

later).

5)  **`SWA_TIMELOCK`**; this is the L1 enforcement of the objection
    window in Section 4, set equal to that window (7 days), and it
    applies to every write the SWA makes to f02. That is, f02 queues
    each SWA write (`SetWeightRecords`, `RegisterStream`, `RemoveStream`)
    with an `effective_epoch` and applies it only after `SWA_TIMELOCK`
    elapses, so the delay binds even if the SWA or the off-chain
    objection process is bypassed.

6)  **New method `SetWeightRecords`.** Callable only by the SWA. Sets the
    Weight record (`v_start`, slope, `t_start`, floor, cap) for w1, w2, and
    any future stream. Validates the minimal conditions before applying:
    `Σ_{i>=1} w_i ≤ 1` (so the burn residual w0 is ≥ 0). f02 queues the
    SWA message and holds it for `SWA_TIMELOCK` epochs.

7)  A companion method **`SetShares(id, map)`** (callable only by stream
    id’s designated writer, the SRA for the service stream) writes the
    stream’s wallet-to-share map (its `EXPLICIT` distribution) that f02
    uses to pay wallets directly; it is validated so the shares sum to
    one.

8)  **New method `GetState`.** Read-only. Returns the stream list (the

>     per-stream Weight records and their current evaluated weights);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    per-stream Weight records and their current evaluated weights).
```

    designated writer.

11) **`SetDistribution`**(id, distribution) re-points a stream’s
    Distribution, in particular the designated writer of an `EXPLICIT`
    stream. Callable only by the SWA and queued under `SWA_TIMELOCK`
    like every SWA write. The stream's current wallet-to-share map
    remains in force until the new writer overwrites it via `SetShares`,
    so payments continue across the transition. Converting a stream to
    `IMPLICIT` is not permitted.

12) **`CancelPending`**(id) discards a queued discretionary SWA write
    during its `SWA_TIMELOCK`; the current state remains in force. Each
    queued write carries an origin tag set at submission: writes
    relayed by the SWA’s `ProposeWrite` (Section 3.1) are discretionary
    and cancellable, while writes originated by `QuarterlyGateCheck` are
    mechanism writes, which `CancelPending` rejects, so a compromised
    Safe cannot suppress a gate step-up (Section 4.3). Callable only
    by the SWA, which exposes the corresponding cancel entry point
    callable by either SWA Safe alone (Section 4.3).

13) **`ComputeWeight`.** The L1 actor f02 evaluates each weight every

>     epoch with one function, `ComputeWeight` which implements a clamped

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    epoch with one function, `ComputeWeight`, which implements a clamped
```

through the normal timelocked write.

#### 2.5 Supply accounting

(TO BE REVIEWED) f02 state holds `total_storage_power_reward`, the
cumulative minted FIL awarded to block miners; clients read it to
compute `FilMined`, an input to circulating supply. The split does not
change how much is minted, only who receives it, so
`total_storage_power_reward` alone no longer measures total minting; the
following changes fix the accounting:

  - **`total_storage_power_reward` keeps its current meaning**: from
    activation onward it accumulates only the consensus stream.

  - f02 adds **one cumulative counter per non-consensus stream**,
    `total_stream_reward[id]`, incremented at accrual in `AwardBlockReward`.

  - **`FilMined` MUST equal
    `total_storage_power_reward + Σ_id total_stream_reward[id]`**,
    exposed via `GetState` [TODO: or a
    dedicated read method, so Lotus, Forest, Venus, and downstream
    consumers migrate uniformly].

  - The burn stream is minted and transferred to f099: counted in
    `FilMined`, captured by `FilBurnt`, net zero on circulating supply.

### 3. Two new contracts

Two FEVM contracts, the SWA and the SRA, parameterize f02. Neither is on

> the value path: the consensus miner and the Orchestrators payout both

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the value path: the consensus miner and the Orchestrator payouts both
```

run entirely in f02, and a failed send burns that share rather than
reverting the epoch's distribution. Neither contract ever receives or

> holds value; the SWA only sets weights records and the SRA only computes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
holds value; the SWA only sets weight records and the SRA only computes
```

boundary: w1 keeps ramping down while w2 holds at its gate-set level,
and the residual is burned.

**`QuarterlyGateCheck`**, run once per quarter from Q2 onward:

```
func QuarterlyGateCheck(Q uint64):
    // 1. Read aggregated volume for the quarter just ended, posted to the SRA
    //    (see FPV definitions in Section 2)
    measured = AggregatedFPV(Q)

    // 2. Read current w2
    state = f02.GetState()
    w2 = state.w2

    // 3. Compute the volume target
    target = ComputeTarget(w2)  // fixed USD schedule, see below

    // 4. Gate decision
    if measured >= target:
        new_ws = min(w2 + W2_STEP, 1 - state.w1)  // w1 read from f02.GetState(), not recomputed
        f02.SetWeightRecords({ w2: new_ws })      // SWA-only; f02 re-derives w0
    // else: gate fails, w2 unchanged
```

**`ComputeTarget` (volume target).** The gate compares USD-denominated
volume directly against a fixed schedule:
**`AggregatedFPV(Q) ≥ ComputeTarget(w2)`**, where w2 is the service
weight before the step-up.
It sets how much on-chain volume the service economy must generate to
unlock the next w2 step-up.

```
W2_STEP    = 0.05  // quarterly increment (5pp) when volume targets are cleared

> W2_INITIAL = 0.10  // starting service weight (10%) established post-bootstrap (end of Q1)

Reviewer 3: I understand this is consistent with the preceding (being post-bootstrap), but overloading starting/initial remains confusing on (at least) first read.

Author: fair, renamed to `W2_BASE` /cc @irenegia

// Frozen schedule (USD): 3.5K, 9.4K, 25.5K, 68.9K, 186K, 502K, 1.36M, 3.66M
// for gates 10->15 through 45->50. Fixed at FIP time.

func ComputeTarget(w2) -> USD:
    steps = (w2 - W2_INITIAL) / W2_STEP  // count of 5pp increments above start
    steps = clamp(steps, 0, (W2_CAP - W2_INITIAL) / W2_STEP - 1)  // bound within [0, 7]: 8 gates, indices 0-7
    return VOL_TARGET_ENTRY * VOL_TARGET_RATIO ^ steps
```

#### 3.2 Service Rewards Actor (SRA): the service stream

The SRA is the governed contract that computes how the service stream is
divided among Orchestrators. In particular,

  - It is governed by SRA Governance (Section 4): two multisig
    accounts held by independent entities (e.g., Safes), with every
    registry change requiring the approval of both and either alone
    able to cancel a pending change during `SRA_CANCEL_HOLD`.

  - The SRA holds the registry (the (payer, operator) to Orchestrator
    bindings and each Orchestrator’s status, active or frozen), the
    posted volumes `FPV_i(Q)` with their verification-window state, the
    two Registry Safe addresses (Section 4.2), and the queue of
    pending governance changes under `SRA_CANCEL_HOLD`; the hold and

>     verification-window durations are parameters settled in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    verification-window durations are parameters set in the
```

        frozen at the close of the posting period are excluded: their
        share is zero and their FPV does not enter `AggregatedFPV(Q)`.
        Like the SWA’s crank, it can submit only the value it computes,
        and it is not held (Section 4.3).

      - **`Admit(orch)`, `Remove(orch)`, `Freeze(orch)`, `Unfreeze(orch)`,
        `Replace(old, new)`, `ReassignBinding(pair, orch)`,
        `SetAdmittedLists(stablecoins, filecoin_pay_contracts)`.**
        Requires the approval of both Registry Safes; each queues under
        `SRA_CANCEL_HOLD` before it binds, and none requires a FIP
        (Section 4.2). `Freeze` suspends an Orchestrator with the frozen
        semantics above; `Unfreeze` restores it exactly. `Remove` releases
        the Orchestrator’s bindings: its pairs return to unclaimed and
        become claimable via `RegisterPairs`. A reassigned pair’s volume
        counts toward the new Orchestrator from the epoch the change
        binds; already-posted quarters are untouched.

      - **`CancelPending(id)`.** Callable by either Registry Safe alone
        during the hold; discards the queued governance change. A

>         cancellation can only preserve the status quo

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        cancellation can only preserve the status quo.
```

    rather than accumulate, and the consensus-portion reduction is
    predictable and can be halted if governance is needed.

  - **Baseline minting coupling.** The split sets each stream's portion
    of the block reward, but the total minting rate itself is not
    stream-neutral: through baseline minting, per-epoch issuance
    depends on raw-byte network power, which is sustained almost
    entirely by the consensus stream. Consensus income (`w1·BR`)
    therefore depends only on activity in its own stream, while the
    service stream’s income (`w2·BR`) also depends on consensus power
    staying near the baseline. At the parameters in this FIP the
    coupling is benign: w1 never falls below its 50% floor and network
    power is not expected to decline materially. It becomes relevant
    only if a future change lowers w1 far enough for power to shrink
    toward the baseline, which would slow issuance for every stream,
    including the service stream. We flag this as known debt rather
    than a design change: any future FIP that substantially reduces w1
    should revisit baseline minting alongside it.

>   - **Volume-gate manipulation.** Detection and enforcement are then

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Volume-gate manipulation.** Detection and enforcement are
```

    valid weight vector whenever the check fails, so payouts can never
    exceed the block reward and a bad schedule degrades to frozen
    weights rather than inflated issuance (Section 2.4); `MAX_STREAMS`
    and `MAX_RECIPIENTS` must bound the per-epoch work so the split
    cannot become a consensus-path denial-of-service; and a failed
    send to any recipient must burn that share rather than revert the
    epoch, with the send path failure-isolated and gas-bounded because
    recipients can be contracts.

  - **Compromised Orchestrator wallet.** An Orchestrator address holds
    no authority over weights or other participants' shares;
    misreports and bogus registrations are windowed and
    dispute-correctable. A key compromise cannot redirect the split, but
    the compromised wallet keeps receiving its share of w2 until
    freeze or removal by the SRA.

## Incentive Considerations

**Client incentives:** clients gain access to subsidized, verifiable,
real-time deal infrastructure without waiting for datacap allocation.

**SP incentives:** all PoRep SPs see their direct block-reward income
reduced by the non-consensus portion (`1 − w1`). SPs who serve clients may

> offset this through deal payments; SPs who do not bear a permanent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
offset this through deal payments; SPs who do not serve clients bear a permanent
```
